[Amit Varma]: I had a bad dream the other day, I dreamed I died and went to hell, a very large demon
[Amit Varma]: with orange hair and a 56 inch chest let me in and said, go forth and suffer, I went forth
[Amit Varma]: and as soon as I entered hell, I fell into a pothole, it was full of dirty water, I somehow
[Amit Varma]: clambered out and walked over to a roadside restaurant, it was a hot day, there was no
[Amit Varma]: electricity there, I was sweating like a pig, I asked the waiter for some water, he said
[Amit Varma]: there was no water in the taps, I got up to go, I walked out and I fell into a pothole
[Amit Varma]: again, as I clambered out, the large demon with orange hair and a 56 inch chest came
[Amit Varma]: and stood in front of me, I asked him, what's going on man, what kind of hell is this, where
[Amit Varma]: is the eternal fire, where are the torture instruments, what kind of hell is this, he
[Amit Varma]: laughed and replied, this is hell 2.0, it is a new improved version, we based it on
[Amit Varma]: Indian urban governance, muahahahaha!
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science, please welcome your host, Amit Bhadwa.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, in today's episode, I will explore why urban governance
[Amit Varma]: in India's cities is so abysmal, my guest for today is Shruti Rajgopalan, an economist
[Amit Varma]: and lawyer who teaches economics in Purchase College in New York, welcome to the show Shruti.
[Amit Varma]: Hi Amit, thanks for having me, Shruti, you were born and brought up in Delhi, yes, and
[Amit Varma]: you come to Bombay very often and now of course you live in New York, so every time you visit
[Amit Varma]: India as you are now, thankfully you are in Mumbai right now at my studio, what is your
[Amit Varma]: impression of Delhi and Mumbai, how have these cities changed over the years?
[Guest]: So one, the cities have really grown, both Delhi and Mumbai are now the greater Delhi
[Guest]: area and the greater Mumbai area, so they have sort of spread both in a geographical
[Guest]: area in size and also in terms of how many people live there.
[Guest]: The other thing is I find that people are actually richer, so people in Delhi per capita
[Guest]: seem to have more cars, more goods and services, so there are some things where there's a very
[Guest]: clear marked improvement, but if you ask about the city infrastructure, even though it seems
[Guest]: that there is a lot of construction and the government always seems to be building some
[Guest]: metro or monorail or flyover or something like that, the infrastructure hasn't kept
[Guest]: up with the demand for that infrastructure, it's always lagging behind and even before
[Guest]: a road is built, it is congested, so it's clearly not built keeping in mind excess capacity
[Guest]: for how the city will look three, you know, three years from now, 30 years from now, 300
[Amit Varma]: years from now.
[Guest]: It's always reactive, you're chasing the demands.
[Guest]: Exactly, so that's one part of it, while I say that the infrastructure, there's some
[Guest]: work going on and it's improved and it hasn't kept up, I actually find a lot of other services
[Guest]: much worse, I feel like garbage collection is worse than it used to be, even though Delhi
[Guest]: has built so many new roads and I'm guessing it must be similar for Bombay, they just seem
[Guest]: to forget to build things like sidewalks and stormwater drains or pedestrian walkways,
[Guest]: there's nowhere for a regular person to walk or for a bus to stop and for regular folks
[Guest]: to get on, so all the activity just spills onto the streets and causes more congestion,
[Guest]: so there clearly seems to be some kind of a service delivery problem, either because
[Guest]: the city governors or those responsible don't really understand what people need or because
[Guest]: there's no reason to provide it and it's just easier to build a flyover than to build public
[Guest]: facilities and toilets and you know, things like that.
[Amit Varma]: And our urban governance has been shoddy for so long that we almost take it for granted,
[Amit Varma]: like just before we started recording, Josh, our producer, was talking about how someone
[Amit Varma]: asked him the other day that, you know, the trains in Bombay have no doors, really?
[Amit Varma]: And that's just something we take for granted, we don't think twice about it, but the fact
[Amit Varma]: is around nine people die every day on Bombay's locals and it's just a throwaway statistic
[Amit Varma]: as if it doesn't matter at all and all through these years, urban governance has never really
[Amit Varma]: improved even though India's focus should really be on the cities, I mean, one third
[Amit Varma]: of India already lives in cities, which is a number which is going to grow by 2050 as
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out in your recent paper, 70% of the world will live in cities, which is
[Amit Varma]: natural because people gravitate to cities from poorer areas because there are greater
[Amit Varma]: economic networks, therefore more opportunities, more productivity, a better life, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people might idolize the rural life, but very seldom do people travel in the other direction.
[Amit Varma]: It's always migration to cities.
[Amit Varma]: So you would imagine with so much of an inward movement into cities, that there is also pressure
[Amit Varma]: from the people to the government to deliver good urban governance.
[Guest]: What are the reasons it is not happening?
[Guest]: So let me unpack the big questions into a few smaller bits.
[Guest]: So first, you're absolutely right, the cities is where the future is, it's already happening
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: We are in the midst of the greatest migration in human history, except that that greatest
[Guest]: migration is happening within borders of nations.
[Guest]: So it's already started and it's accelerated in China, and it's happening in India.
[Guest]: So by 2030, 600 million people in India will live in cities.
[Guest]: Right now, the number is just a little over 350 million.
[Guest]: So either the number of cities need to double or our cities need to grow twice in size to
[Guest]: accommodate these people and everything that they have to offer.
[Guest]: The second part of it, as you rightly pointed out, is that these cities are also going to
[Guest]: be the drivers of economic growth and productivity.
[Guest]: So I've always held the belief that people are not poor, it's just people are trapped
[Guest]: in low productivity and poor areas.
[Guest]: The exact same worker who is trapped in a low productivity area in the village comes
[Guest]: to the city, finds work and his wages immediately double or triple or quadruple, right?
[Guest]: And that's the reason to come to cities.
[Guest]: So the great migration in total is an excellent thing for India and for Indians to get out
[Guest]: of this sort of poverty trap.
[Guest]: Now having said that, this also puts a lot of stress on urban governance.
[Guest]: And people who are migrating may not be, it may not be their top priority to demand urban
[Guest]: governance.
[Guest]: They sort of just showed up in a city like Mumbai and they're just trying to make a living.
[Guest]: If making a living involves taking a train, which is almost a death wish to get to work
[Guest]: and get back, that's what they do because that's what they need to do to get to work
[Guest]: on time, right?
[Guest]: They have fewer choices.
[Guest]: People who are already settled and entrenched in cities, such as you've been living in Bombay
[Amit Varma]: for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: We've become apathetic to all this.
[Guest]: So technically you are the people who are more likely to demand better governance and
[Guest]: some of that does happen.
[Guest]: But as you said, a lot of apathy and you just get used to it.
[Guest]: And more importantly, all of us have found our own juggards, right?
[Guest]: So if the garbage collection provided by the state doesn't work very well, the resident
[Guest]: society or association figures out a way to have some kind of garbage association and
[Guest]: collects a small fee for it.
[Guest]: I see this happening in all sorts of suburbs all over the place.
[Guest]: So between these two things, because people do have to get on with their life, right?
[Guest]: Everything can't be a big protest over everyday issues.
[Guest]: I think that's sort of the trap that's going on in terms of the demand side of things.
[Guest]: The other part of it is there is something a little messed up going on structurally in
[Guest]: terms of how we have set up urban local bodies or municipalities, which are actually supposed
[Guest]: to be responsible for city governance.
[Guest]: We have created these urban local bodies through a constitutional amendment in the mid-nineties.
[Guest]: Having said that, we democratized it.
[Guest]: We created an entire layer of elected officials and also staffed bureaucrats to help those
[Guest]: officials.
[Guest]: But we gave them no authority and we gave them no revenue raising ability, which basically
[Guest]: means we have an entire new layer of government, which is essentially toothless.
[Guest]: And this is the most important layer of government in my mind when it comes to delivering services
[Guest]: to people, especially if most of the people in the country are eventually going to live
[Guest]: in cities.
[Guest]: So I think that structural problem that we have in the Indian federal system is what
[Guest]: needs to be addressed, because even though Delhi's problems might be stormwater drains
[Guest]: and Mumbai's problems might be roads and Surat's might be garbage collection or something else,
[Guest]: it's actually the same problem structurally.
[Guest]: It's the governance delivery mechanism which is broken.
[Amit Varma]: So let me go through that again.
[Amit Varma]: Now typically, people who believe in governance would say local government is a great thing,
[Amit Varma]: especially if there's democracy, because your leaders are accountable to you.
[Amit Varma]: You elect your local corporators, councillors, whoever, and you hold them accountable.
[Amit Varma]: If they don't deliver, if they don't collect the garbage, if they don't clear out the potholes
[Amit Varma]: outside, then you vote them out.
[Amit Varma]: But where you are saying the system is broken is that yes, you vote them in and out, but
[Amit Varma]: they are powerless because they can't, A, they don't raise their own funds and B, often
[Amit Varma]: they don't have the power to actually affect the kind of change which you elect them to
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Guest]: So how does the system work then?
[Guest]: Okay, so India is a federal country, or when we used to be young and we had these civics
[Guest]: textbooks, it used to have this throwaway line, India is a federal nation with a unitary
[Guest]: bias, which I never knew what it meant until I grew older.
[Guest]: And now I realize it means that India is not federal.
[Guest]: It just has a lot of states.
[Guest]: But the way the Indian Federation was set up was there was a far greater level of centralization
[Guest]: than say many other federal countries like the United States.
[Guest]: Now the way the Indian Federation was set up was while you have state elections and
[Guest]: local elections and so on, it is not fiscally federal, right?
[Guest]: This means that there was a body that was created when the constitution was adopted
[Guest]: called the Finance Commission.
[Guest]: The revenue that was collected all over the country would be centralized and then the
[Guest]: Finance Commission would determine how much of that revenue needs to go back to which
[Guest]: state and which area.
[Guest]: This basically means that the link between where the revenue is collected and where the
[Guest]: expenditure is made is broken, which is normally not the case with local government.
[Guest]: Now note that when the Indian constitution was adopted, there was no such thing as an
[Guest]: urban local government constitutionally.
[Guest]: There was no provision for local governments.
[Guest]: The simple assumption was state governments will take care of it.
[Guest]: Like why wouldn't they?
[Guest]: And every state is different.
[Guest]: Some of them are more rural.
[Guest]: Some of them are more urban.
[Amit Varma]: So the assumption was the states would have these local arms as a voter, your voice really
[Guest]: is to elect your chief minister.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Then through the decades, they figured out that this kind of centralization is really
[Guest]: hurting local governance, most importantly the villages.
[Guest]: So there was a huge push to have local level institutions.
[Guest]: This was a fairly revolutionary move at the time and even today.
[Guest]: So this happened through the 73rd amendment, which set up panchayati raj institutions in
[Guest]: rural areas and the 74th amendment, which set up ULBs or urban local bodies in urban
[Guest]: areas.
[Guest]: Now what the 73rd and the 74th amendment did, if you actually look at the text of these
[Guest]: amendments, it sets up in detail what that government structure would look like.
[Guest]: How will these people be elected?
[Guest]: How many of those seats will be reserved versus general seats?
[Guest]: How many of the different categories you will have?
[Guest]: How many women?
[Guest]: Once you elect them, there is a long list of responsibilities.
[Guest]: So the way you have the seventh schedule, which gives you the union state and concurrent
[Guest]: list, which determines what the central government and the state governments can legislate upon.
[Guest]: There was something introduced called the 12th schedule, which had details of all the
[Guest]: areas such as, you know, town planning, garbage collection, all the things that local governments
[Guest]: must take care of.
[Guest]: So all this was very clearly drafted and specified.
[Guest]: Having said that, there was one crucial problem with the 73rd and the 74th amendment.
[Guest]: The way you have a central finance commission, which splits the money between the central
[Guest]: government and various states, they enabled an entire new set of finance commissions called
[Guest]: the state finance commission.
[Guest]: So Maharashtra will have one, Gujarat will have one.
[Guest]: And these finance commissions only have recommending power, they don't have any authority to execute
[Guest]: their recommendations.
[Guest]: So they recommend to the state legislature how much of the revenue will be split between
[Guest]: the state government and the local governments.
[Guest]: In this case, they are panchayati raj institutions and urban local bodies.
[Guest]: Now despite repeated recommendations by various state finance commissions, the amount or the
[Guest]: percentage of the revenue which is actually devolved to the lowest level of government
[Guest]: is very small.
[Guest]: That's one.
[Guest]: The second issue is it's extremely arbitrary and not consistent.
[Guest]: So some of the governments actually devolve a fair bit.
[Guest]: Sometimes they'll do it as a one time thing because of the push from the central government
[Guest]: or something like that.
[Guest]: And then the next year, it won't happen or it stops.
[Guest]: So if you just think about the way fiscal theory works, you can raise your own money,
[Guest]: you know, by actually collecting taxes.
[Guest]: You can raise it through bonds or by the state issuing bonds and going into debt.
[Guest]: Or you can get it through intergovernmental transfer, which is the, you know, what the
[Guest]: finance commission does.
[Guest]: It gives money from the center to the states, it transfers money between states.
[Guest]: State finance commissions give money from state to local government.
[Guest]: The theory suggests, and this is played out empirically everywhere, that the less you
[Guest]: rely on intergovernmental transfers, the better it is, simply because intergovernmental transfers
[Guest]: break the link between the citizen and the people who are governing those citizens.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So let me give you an example.
[Guest]: Now let's say that the residents of Khar, where we are recording this, actually want
[Guest]: sidewalks to be built and want better garbage collection.
[Guest]: Those are their top two demands.
[Guest]: And you have some kind of a municipal authority and someone from Khar is a representative
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: Now he's elected by these people.
[Guest]: He will take all the demands to the powers that be.
[Guest]: Now since he doesn't control his own purse strings and he has no revenue raising authority,
[Guest]: he finally needs to please some bureaucrat in the government of Maharashtra to allot
[Guest]: those funds.
[Guest]: So now let's say the bureaucrat wants a flyover named after Ambedkar, okay?
[Guest]: And that's his preference.
[Guest]: Remember, initially we started out with the citizen's preference was garbage collection
[Guest]: and building of sidewalks.
[Guest]: Now whose preference should he cater to?
[Guest]: The representative from Khar.
[Guest]: The people who voted for him want one thing and the person who's going to give him the
[Guest]: money wants something completely different.
[Guest]: So one is he has all this responsibility and he can be removed in the next election and
[Guest]: so on, but he doesn't have much power.
[Guest]: He needs to finally bow down before someone else and that someone else is not the voters
[Guest]: or the taxpayers.
[Guest]: Second is all these fine residents of Khar are actually paying taxes and they think that
[Guest]: their taxes should fetch them all these local services, but their taxes actually go towards
[Guest]: building the Ambedkar flyover in Malad instead of Khar.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because the bureaucrat or the legislator in Maharashtra wanted an Ambedkar flyover in
[Guest]: Malad.
[Guest]: So that's exactly what ends up happening.
[Guest]: You have extremely disgruntled voters.
[Guest]: You have extremely disgruntled taxpayers.
[Guest]: All that money is being spent and yet the actual connection between our demand for a
[Guest]: specific service and the supply of that specific service is broken.
[Amit Varma]: So let me unpack it for a moment from the perspective of incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Usually if you had an accountable local government, you would have a corporator who has the budgets
[Amit Varma]: he needs to do whatever and his incentives are to please the people who elected him and
[Amit Varma]: to give them what they want, which in this case is a sidewalk and the garbage collection.
[Amit Varma]: However, that is not his incentive because he doesn't hold the purse strings.
[Amit Varma]: His incentive is to please the bureaucrat or the legislator.
[Amit Varma]: The bureaucrat's incentives will be something different entirely.
[Amit Varma]: It might be to build a flyover in Malad where he gets kickbacks from the contractor and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: All the incentives are messed up simply because of fiscal purse strings are not where they
[Guest]: should be.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I think it's a very, very important principle of governance, which we never really appreciated
[Guest]: much in India and it seems to be completely lost now, that there needs to be democratic
[Guest]: accountability and also fiscal accountability.
[Guest]: India is a very, very staunchly democratic country at every level of governance.
[Guest]: You actually see people showing up to elect representatives at local elections and panchayati
[Guest]: raj elections.
[Guest]: We are very democratically inclined.
[Guest]: Indians like to vote.
[Guest]: They like to protest.
[Amit Varma]: They like to register their voice.
[Amit Varma]: And we do have an involved citizenry.
[Guest]: You should look at the people in my society.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: You have a very involved citizenry.
[Guest]: Having said that, given that it's not a fiscally devolved state or we seem to have lost the
[Guest]: concept of fiscal accountability and all the fiscal governance is completely centralized
[Guest]: in New Delhi or in the state capital of every state and it's not being further devolved
[Guest]: to the people, the link between the voice, which represents a democratically in the voting
[Guest]: booth and the actual payment that accompanies it in local taxes is completely broken.
[Guest]: So that is one very big part of the problem.
[Guest]: The other very big part of the problem is this kind of heavy reliance on intergovernmental
[Guest]: transfers.
[Guest]: So what happens right now, I see a lot of disgruntled people in Mumbai whose taxes are
[Guest]: going to be spent on loan waivers in UP.
[Guest]: This is a typical intergovernmental transfer problem.
[Guest]: So the money that is raised in Mumbai that even within the current system should technically
[Guest]: go to the coffers of Maharashtra government and then come back to the people of Maharashtra,
[Guest]: even if not just Mumbai, now actually goes away centrally to a different pool and then
[Guest]: goes to other states which don't have the same revenue raising capacity as Mumbai because
[Guest]: they're not as productive in terms of, you know, urban areas as Mumbai is and it goes
[Guest]: to loan waivers in Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: So this is the other reason for being disgruntled.
[Guest]: We have people paying taxes and we have people registering their voices.
[Amit Varma]: You could say no wonder people want to evade taxes and don't take the responsibility seriously
[Guest]: because they're like, look, I'm not getting banked for my buck.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So that's the unintended consequence of this.
[Guest]: On the face of it, it looks like we live in a regular democracy and a regular federal
[Guest]: nation and there's local governance.
[Guest]: But actually when you unpack the structure of it, we do live in a democracy, but we have
[Guest]: no federalism because all federalism needs to be backed by fiscal federalism.
[Guest]: So if you give the power and the responsibility to various layers of government and finally
[Guest]: you don't devolve the revenue raising capacity, that kind of federalism is absolutely meaningless.
[Amit Varma]: The essential thing here is that the power and the responsibility should be with the
[Amit Varma]: same person.
[Amit Varma]: And here you have the local corporator you elect having the responsibility, but the power
[Amit Varma]: being with someone else who is not accountable in any way.
[Guest]: So let me just tweak what you said a little bit.
[Guest]: In a country that's both democratic and fiscally federal, the power is always with the people.
[Guest]: It's not with the corporator or the legislator.
[Guest]: So they have the power to either vote you out or to protest when taxes are raised to
[Guest]: claim loan waiver somewhere else.
[Guest]: So if you keep raising taxes without giving the residents of Khar their garbage disposal
[Guest]: and stormwater drains and sidewalk, then they'll stop voting for you and they'll protest any
[Guest]: kind of tax increase.
[Guest]: And that is what is broken in India.
[Guest]: So just to put this in perspective, since you asked about governance, my parents moved
[Guest]: to Noida to a beautiful condo association.
[Guest]: That condo association has incredible politics, which is fascinating for me to watch.
[Guest]: Every decision on the maintenance of the generator, should we put a new water filtering unit,
[Guest]: should we have speed breakers in front of every individual building within the larger
[Guest]: complex because, you know, there are kids that come back from school and you don't want
[Guest]: cars driving fast.
[Guest]: Every decision is vigorously debated with a lot of, you know, high emotion when you
[Guest]: go to the association meetings and you think about it and you're like, why isn't all this
[Guest]: emotion seen anywhere else?
[Guest]: It's because they know that their voice will be heard and they pay maintenance fees and
[Guest]: they want to get banged for their buck.
[Guest]: And whoever is the local elected representative is their neighbor.
[Guest]: He'll have no choice but to hear them and to execute the wishes of the larger group
[Amit Varma]: of people.
[Amit Varma]: This energy would be wasted anywhere else except within this association.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So now if I think about it, there are about, I believe, 3,000 flats and, you know, a little
[Guest]: over 10,000 residents in that particular condo association.
[Guest]: And it has a lot of small and big governance problems.
[Guest]: I mean, it maintains its own parks.
[Guest]: It has its own roads.
[Guest]: It has its own parking garage.
[Guest]: It has its own power backup unit.
[Guest]: So it's not really running a city, but it's like running a tiny neighborhood, a microcosm
[Guest]: of a city.
[Guest]: And so the problems are the same at a smaller scale.
[Guest]: And because it is more local and the people who are voting are also paying maintenance
[Guest]: fee for the condo association, which is a sort of tax equivalent in this case, they
[Guest]: are able to demand their service delivery.
[Guest]: And when I see that in action, so my recommendation is not that we should move everything to condo
[Guest]: associations.
[Guest]: That's not where I'm going with this.
[Guest]: The insight I would take from this example is simply that you need to make both the voice
[Guest]: and the taxpaying or the revenue raising ability to be aligned in purpose and between the same
[Guest]: groups of people for the whole system to work.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So my next obvious follow up question then is that what are the changes we need to see,
[Amit Varma]: which I presume are just, you know, getting the fiscal reins into the hands of whoever
[Amit Varma]: you elect locally and how likely are they to happen?
[Amit Varma]: What are the interest groups against that?
[Guest]: And you know, what is the process?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, you know, structurally, the system that we have in India is such that no one is mandating
[Guest]: that you need to devolve more revenue downstream.
[Guest]: Having said that, there is nothing in the system that prevents any government from doing
[Guest]: so.
[Guest]: It is possible tomorrow for the parliament to say that the Finance Commission is going
[Guest]: to only leave 10% to the centre and 90% to the states.
[Guest]: There's nothing that stops them from legislating on that.
[Guest]: Similarly, there's nothing that stops the states from legislating that we will have
[Guest]: 30% with the state government and 70% with the local government.
[Guest]: So it's a question of devolution.
[Guest]: It's not mandated.
[Guest]: Who appoints the Finance Commission?
[Guest]: Who appoints it?
[Guest]: It's a constitutional body.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And they are, they only have recommendatory power.
[Amit Varma]: They don't have any power to execute.
[Amit Varma]: I'm talking about the Central Finance Commission.
[Amit Varma]: So who appoints it?
[Guest]: I'm trying to figure out their incentives, deciding upon what the devolution should be.
[Guest]: Oh, think of them as high level bureaucrats and technocrats.
[Guest]: So it's not an elected body.
[Guest]: It's usually filled with experts.
[Guest]: And of course, every government has, you know, a few favoured people that they believe have
[Guest]: the right voice and so on.
[Guest]: And they look for them.
[Guest]: Having said that, the Finance Commission is actually an excellent body in that they invite
[Guest]: a lot of recommendations from various interests, state, city, local, they write a detailed
[Guest]: Finance Commission report.
[Guest]: So you know, you have, you can go online and have access from the first to the most recent
[Guest]: Finance Commission reports.
[Guest]: So it's actually an excellent body.
[Guest]: So we don't have the typical like corrupt politician bureaucrat kind of problem with
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: The problem is everything that they recommend is typically not heard.
[Guest]: So every time the Finance Commission has said we need greater devolution of revenues and
[Guest]: resources, nobody in the legislature has any incentive to follow that.
[Guest]: So that is really the problem.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And just to just to like come to the Maharashtra level, I often hear people complaining about
[Amit Varma]: how so much tax is generated in Mumbai for the state, most of them are, but it goes out
[Amit Varma]: into the rural areas, because that's where the legislators' votes comes from.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So that's natural.
[Amit Varma]: Those are the incentives at play.
[Guest]: And that is what they will do.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So here, I think the problem is more the incentives of the legislature, right?
[Guest]: So this problem, some people will believe will get very quickly resolved, because the
[Guest]: largest number of people are going to live in urban areas.
[Guest]: So very soon, this problem ought to solve itself.
[Guest]: Having said that, we are in the midst of the greatest migration.
[Guest]: Most people don't live where they're registered to vote while they're moving from rural to
[Guest]: urban areas.
[Guest]: It's not like you and me who've lived in the same place for 10 years, and so on, so forth.
[Guest]: So it's difficult for them to come to a new place and find, I mean, most people in Mumbai
[Guest]: don't even have a pakka address, you know, the migrants, they just come and they have
[Guest]: friends and family and some social networks that they stay with for a little while and
[Guest]: then figure out their own housing situation.
[Guest]: So the migrants, even though they're increasing in number, they are not going to be the ones
[Guest]: who register as increasing in number of votes.
[Guest]: So that is something that we need to keep in mind.
[Guest]: So that's a force which will eventually even out.
[Guest]: But while we're in the process of urbanization, I don't see more people coming to the cities
[Guest]: necessarily translating as more votes.
[Guest]: So that's one.
[Guest]: I think the revenue raising ability of cities is only going to grow.
[Guest]: Having said that, while the cities do raise a lot of revenue, we need to figure out a
[Guest]: way by which the cities get to spend that revenue within.
[Guest]: So right now, we have some interesting data.
[Guest]: So you have three kinds of urban local bodies.
[Guest]: So you have municipal corporations, which are the largest, you know, something like
[Guest]: the BMC or the Delhi Municipal Corporation, so on.
[Guest]: Then you have municipalities, which are the next level, they're smaller.
[Guest]: And then you have nagar panchayat, which is like the really small, semi urban sort of
[Guest]: areas.
[Guest]: Now this is an interesting detail.
[Guest]: Think about your own sources of revenue and other sources of revenue.
[Guest]: So your own sources of revenue is what you raised through property and local taxes.
[Guest]: Other sources of revenue is what you get through intergovernmental transfers.
[Guest]: The debt raising ability of most urban local governments is very small.
[Guest]: So we'll leave that out of it for the moment.
[Guest]: So if you're a large municipal corporation like the BMC and the Delhi government, Delhi
[Guest]: municipality, you have, which is I think the MCD.
[Guest]: You raise almost 65 to 70% of your own revenue.
[Guest]: If you are a municipality, which is the next smaller local urban local government, it's
[Guest]: about between 25 to 30%.
[Guest]: And if you're a nagar panchayat, you are raising only about 20% of your own revenue.
[Guest]: So now just think about these numbers.
[Guest]: If you're raising only 20% of your revenue from your constituents, or your taxpayers,
[Guest]: and hopefully they're the same or they should be the same, then 80% has to come from somewhere
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: That is either a central government bureaucrat or a state government bureaucrat.
[Guest]: So 80% of the spend is determined by somebody else and only 20% is determined by the residents
[Guest]: who actually voted for you.
[Guest]: This creates the big mismatch.
[Guest]: So now what I see in the future is a small nagar panchayat, which organically should
[Guest]: eventually grow into a municipality, and eventually into a large municipal corporation, is never
[Guest]: going to be able to do so unless the intergovernmental transfer system supports it.
[Guest]: And right now, where is the incentive for the powers that be at the centre and state
[Guest]: to say, I'm going to give a disproportionately large amount of money to a very small city,
[Guest]: hoping that it will become a very big city.
[Guest]: That incentive absolutely doesn't exist.
[Guest]: So what happens, more money goes to established cities, there is no money spent on creating
[Guest]: new urban capacity, and there is no money or no effort spent on increasing local revenue.
[Guest]: The other part of this is, urban local bodies actually don't end up spending all the money
[Guest]: that they raise.
[Guest]: And when you actually, I haven't done so myself, but there are other people who've written
[Guest]: papers and surveyed all these local corporators and so on, and they ask them, you have all
[Guest]: this money, why haven't you spent it?
[Guest]: And they say, we don't have any idea on whether this source of revenue is reliable.
[Guest]: We got some one-time money from the state government, we got some one-time money from
[Guest]: the federal government, and we don't know if we'll come again in the future.
[Guest]: So we can't start a big infrastructure or a governance project.
[Guest]: So we just let the money sit.
[Guest]: Which is a very sensible thing to do, because if you start doing something and you can't
[Guest]: finish it, it's highly visible, and the voters will vote you out.
[Guest]: If you just don't do anything and the state of affairs is as they were yesterday, and
[Guest]: no promises were made and no promises were broken, you are less likely to get booted
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: And people continue with the inertia and apathy.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So this is sort of the way the current system works at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: So for a moment, contrast the state of Bombay and Delhi, which has the same structural deficiency
[Amit Varma]: that you just described, with the city where you now live, New York, how is it different?
[Guest]: I don't have the exact data for New York City off the top of my head.
[Guest]: So first, first things first, the United States is far more federal and far more fiscally
[Guest]: federal than the Indian Republic ever was or ever intended to be.
[Guest]: So there is a really big difference in the constitutional setup of these two countries.
[Guest]: So the states were always supposed to be responsible for all state and local issues, and the federal
[Guest]: government was only supposed to be responsible for defense and foreign affairs and so on.
[Guest]: That's how the original United States Constitution was set up.
[Guest]: Now every state, like the Indian system, is supposed to devolve power to urban local bodies.
[Guest]: The difference is that that happened in America and it didn't happen in India.
[Guest]: The second thing is, urban local bodies came as an afterthought in India.
[Guest]: In America, it was the reverse.
[Guest]: Immigrants went and settled in small clusters.
[Guest]: Those clusters formed small local governments, and then those local governments became aligned
[Guest]: or got absorbed into some kind of a system within that state government.
[Guest]: So the process was bottom up almost in the United States, at least in the initial period,
[Guest]: as opposed to India, where it was completely top down, where we disconnected what happened
[Guest]: during the colonial times and said, we will reboot in 1950 with this new system.
[Guest]: And the new system had no mention of urban local governments or rural local governments.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, even now, the kind of reforms that you're saying you'd like to see are again
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally reforms that will come top down itself.
[Amit Varma]: And that's sort of what worries me.
[Amit Varma]: How realistic is it then to expect that given the incentives?
[Guest]: So there are two ways to think about this.
[Guest]: Now, one way is we actually mandate that the revenue that is raised locally stays local.
[Guest]: We change the rules.
[Guest]: Yes, we change the rules of the game.
[Guest]: We say that there are certain taxes which are reserved for local bodies.
[Guest]: Those taxes can only be imposed locally, and the money will stay with the urban local government
[Guest]: or the rural local government.
[Guest]: And that's one way to do it.
[Guest]: Now, if you think about it, who votes on constitutional amendments, parliamentarians, right?
[Guest]: These kinds of constitutional amendments need to be ratified by half the number of states.
[Guest]: So the other people who will vote on this is the state legislators.
[Guest]: Both have no incentives of cutting off the branch.
[Guest]: Yes, exactly.
[Guest]: So it's almost like killing the goose that gives the golden egg, right?
[Amit Varma]: So the only hope really is that cities grow more and more populated and then the demand
[Guest]: side takes care of it.
[Guest]: So that is the other way of thinking about it.
[Guest]: So right now, I don't think there is any incentive among legislators to actually devolve more.
[Guest]: Now there are a few things that can happen.
[Guest]: Now even though institutions and rules of the game are really important, individuals
[Guest]: are also really important.
[Guest]: I think it's a great move in India that the chief minister of a state after a very long
[Guest]: time became the prime minister of a country, right?
[Guest]: I think he had a vast experience as chief minister to really understand how we need
[Guest]: to be a more federal nation.
[Guest]: Now whether Modi has made India more federal or not is debatable, but a lot of his rhetoric
[Guest]: talked about competitive federalism and, you know, devolving greater power to the states,
[Guest]: so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And it must be said that during Modi's time, the finance commission's recommendations have
[Guest]: actually been taken and greater proportion of the central finances have been devolved
[Guest]: to the states, more so than ever before in any government.
[Guest]: So there is some move made by some individuals who strongly believe in federalism and I don't
[Guest]: think we should underestimate that push because once a push goes in that direction, then,
[Guest]: you know, it may continue to gain momentum and go in that direction, whether or not this
[Amit Varma]: government lives to see the day.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the default state of all systems in a sense is inertia.
[Guest]: So any push can go a long way if it gathers momentum.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And I think this push will continue further.
[Guest]: So right now, I think Modi government devolved an additional 12 to 16%, I don't remember
[Guest]: the numbers off the top of my head, to the states than the governments before.
[Guest]: And maybe that trend will continue and that would be great.
[Guest]: So I would not underestimate a really strong and charismatic chief minister of any state
[Guest]: attempting to devolve greater funds to the local governments, right, to urban local and
[Guest]: rural local governments, especially urban local governments, because that's where a
[Guest]: vast majority of the population is going to be.
[Guest]: But I don't see why any of this shouldn't apply to rural local governments.
[Guest]: Their problems are different.
[Guest]: They might need irrigation systems, and they might need better health care for women and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: That's what their problems are.
[Amit Varma]: So they should be the ones to decide.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So this applies for both urban and rural areas.
[Guest]: So one is, I would not underestimate the importance of individuals in key positions who make such
[Guest]: a move.
[Guest]: So that would be number one.
[Guest]: The other is, I think eventually, when the urbanization process sort of starts to plateau,
[Guest]: and a large population already lives in urban areas, you have to eventually see that push
[Guest]: come bottom up, right?
[Guest]: The third way of thinking about this is, we've already privatized a lot of public goods services,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: A lot of, if you go to certain neighborhoods in Delhi, they get private water tankers,
[Guest]: rich and poor neighborhoods.
[Guest]: There are a lot of neighborhoods where garbage collection is now completely private, because
[Guest]: the municipal governments just stopped bothering to collect garbage.
[Amit Varma]: And the citizens took their own.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So when you dump garbage in the municipal dump, it's actually rack pickers who separate
[Guest]: the garbage also privately, right?
[Guest]: They do it so that they can collect the plastic and the recyclables and make money off of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So I would also not underestimate the importance of private enterprise to help solve a lot
[Guest]: of quasi public good issues.
[Guest]: Now the trouble with this is you end up paying taxes.
[Guest]: And then you again, end up paying the maintenance fee for a condo or for garbage collection
[Guest]: or whatever it is.
[Guest]: And so far, Indians are doing it because these services are so incredibly important that
[Guest]: even the poorest of people end up paying money for, you know, better sewage systems or garbage
[Guest]: collection systems, even in slums.
[Amit Varma]: They don't have a choice.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just to just to put it harshly, the government is basically a parasite, if not
[Amit Varma]: a service provider.
[Amit Varma]: So they have to get the service provided from elsewhere.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And you see this in a lot of slums in Bombay and in other other big cities or other emerging
[Guest]: cities that there is a completely different political economy of slum governance, and
[Guest]: a lot of it is government and public, but a lot of it is also privately funded.
[Guest]: And there is a local dada or you know, a slum leader who collects the money, right, and
[Guest]: actually ends up delivering the service.
[Guest]: So this is already happening.
[Guest]: The problem is when you pay twice as much tax, you lose a lot in productivity, right?
[Guest]: So that's a problem.
[Guest]: The other is you have a lot of disgruntled citizens who feel like the state is oppressing
[Guest]: them and they are not getting their bang for the buck.
[Amit Varma]: Correctly so, yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So let me try to sum up everything we've discussed so far.
[Amit Varma]: The reason our cities are in such a bad state is because we need genuine fiscal federalism.
[Amit Varma]: Even though we do have local governments in a nominal sense, those elected representatives
[Amit Varma]: can't really be held accountable because they don't have the power, the money comes from
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And to fix fiscal federalism, you basically see three rays of hope.
[Amit Varma]: One is enlightened individuals at the top who push these reforms through and make sure
[Amit Varma]: more and more money is devolved to the states.
[Amit Varma]: Second is as more and more people move to cities, a bottom up demand side led movement
[Amit Varma]: for change.
[Amit Varma]: And the third is private individuals just doing jogar and managing for themselves and
[Amit Varma]: essentially organizing themselves to do what the government has failed to provide them.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So you can either reform government or you can make it irrelevant.
[Guest]: So we don't know where the push will be, whether we will end up reforming government or making
[Guest]: it irrelevant.
[Guest]: But it has to be one of those two choices.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you will just see vast heaps of garbage everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, on that delightful note, thank you for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
[Unknown]: This is your captain speaking.
[Unknown]: Sorry to say, but there's been a slight delay due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun.
[Unknown]: As you can see, there's death, destruction and chaos taking place all around us.
[Unknown]: But don't you worry, food and drinks will be served shortly.
[Unknown]: And I would recommend checking out to get some of your favorite Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows over.
[Unknown]: Thank you.